feat: Add BYOB Bazel Builder (#2267)
slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator: internal/builders/bazel/README.md

to build the artifact(s) and generate SLSA provenance. We'll call this
workflow the "Bazel builder" from now on.

---

<!-- markdown-toc --bullets="-" -i README.md -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Benefits of Provenance](#benefits-of-provenance)
- [Development status](#development-status)
- [Generating Provenance](#generating-provenance)
  - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Referencing the Bazel builder](#referencing-the-bazel-builder)
  - [Private Repositories](#private-repositories)
  - [Supported Triggers](#supported-triggers)
  - [Workflow Inputs](#workflow-inputs)
  - [Workflow Outputs](#workflow-outputs)
  - [Provenance Format](#provenance-format)
  - [Provenance Example](#provenance-example)

<!-- tocstop -->

---

## Benefits of Provenance

Using the Bazel builder will generate a non-forgeable attestation to the
Bazel build artifacts produced using the identity of the GitHub workflow. This can be used to
create a positive attestation to an artifact coming from your repository.

That means that once your users verify the artifact they have downloaded they can
be sure that it was created by your repository's workflow and hasn't been
tampered with.

## Development status

> The Bazel builder is currently in beta. The API could change while approaching

Reviewer: Is this in `beta`? or are we planning to release it very soon?

If not we may want to just say it's under development.

Author: Right! Will change to say it's under development, thank you for the catch!

| Name              | Required | Default            | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ----------------- | -------- | ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| rekor-log-public  | No       | false              | Set to true to opt-in to posting to the public transparency log. Will generate an error if false for private repositories. This input has no effect for public repositories. See [Private Repositories](#private-repositories).<br>Default: `false` |
| targets           | Yes      |                    | A space separated list of targets to build and generate artifacts for. See [targets](https://bazel.build/concepts/build-ref#targets) for more information. \                                                                                        |

> | flags             | No       | ""                 | A space separated list of flags to modify the build by. See [flags](https://bazel.build/docs/user-manual#build-options) for more information. \                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: I wonder if we have done any kind of exploration as to what allowing arbitrary flags to bazel would allow a user to do?

For example, we can change the `--package_path` which might open it up to some strange exploits. I suppose this is mostly fine as long as we record the `flags` input.

Author: I have not done any exploration on that front, but will mark it down for further review!

Author: > For example, we can change the `--package_path` which might open it up to some strange exploits. I suppose this is mostly fine as long as we are recording the `flags` input.

What exploits were you thinking that --package_path could produce? I have been looking over all the flag options [here](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#options-common-to-all-commands), and I think the flags that could be exploited would just hurt the user that calls the builder in their workflow.

The user could alter different flags to the builder such that their build is delayed, but wouldn't that just hurt them?

The flags input is recorded in the provenance generated.

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm not sure that this is an issue we need to resolve on this PR. Just musing really.

BTW is there a way to specify the bazel version you use? Some flags might be supported on this or that version so it might be good if the user could specify that. Maybe something to consider on a later PR.

[.bazelversion file](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk#how-does-bazelisk-know-which-bazel-version-to-run)
, [.bazelrc file](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc)
, and a
[MODULE.bazel file](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module).

To get started, you will need to add some steps to your current workflow. We
will assume you have an existing Github Actions workflow to build your project.
This assumes that the files above are in the root directory of your
repository.

We also define the targets to be built as 'fib' and 'hello', and
we define the flag of the build to be '--strip=always'

The following reusable workflow call will build the targets and upload the artifacts into a .zip and
generate provenance attestations which will be uploaded as another .zip to the
workflow run.

```yaml
jobs:
  build:
    permissions:
      id-token: write # For signing
      contents: read # For repo checkout.
      actions: read # For getting workflow run info.
    if: startsWith(github.ref, 'refs/tags/')
    uses: slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/.github/workflows/builder_bazel_slsa3.yml@v1.7.0
    with:
      targets: "//src:fib //src:hello"
      flags: "--strip=always"
```

> The `targets` are a set of space separated build targets to be built. The targets are assume to
> be referenced from the root of the directory. Because of this the each target inputted should be referenced
> as `//path/from/root/to/target:your_target`.

Reviewer: We should also mention that the target identifier needs to be specified. Bazel allows you to specify just a package name and defaults to a target id with the same name as the package name (e.g. `bazel build //test` will build `//test:test`)
```suggestion
The `targets` are a set of space separated build targets to be built. Each target must include the `//` workspace root identifier and package target identifier (`:your_target`). Because of this each target should be of the form `//path/from/root/to/target:your_target`.
```

Author: Thank you for the clarification!

because the build will fail if you reference it via a shorter tag like `@vX.Y`
or `@vX` or if you reference it by a hash.

For more information about this design decision and how to configure
renovatebot, see the main repository [README.md](../../../README.md).

### Private Repositories

Private repositories are supported with some caveats. Currently all builds
generate and post a new entry in the public
[Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) API server instance at
https://rekor.sigstore.dev/. This entry includes the repository name. This will cause the
private repository name to leak and be discoverable via the public Rekor API
server.

If this is ok with you, you can set the `rekor-log-public` flag in order to
opt in to publishing to the public Rekor instance from a private repository.

```yaml
with:
  rekor-log-public: true
```

If you do not set this flag then private repositories will generate an error in
order to prevent leaking repository name information.

Support for private transparency log instances that would not leak repository
name information is tracked on [issue #372](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/issues/372).

### Supported Triggers

> The following [GitHub trigger
> events](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows)
> are fully supported and tested:
> 
> - `schedule`
> - `push` (including new tags)
> - `release`
> - Manual run via `workflow_dispatch`
> 
> However, in practice, most triggers should work with the exception of
> `pull_request`. If you would like support for `pull_request`, please tell us
> about your use case on
> [issue #358](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/issues/358). If
> you have an issue in all other triggers please submit a
> [new issue](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer: These are the event types BYOB supports based on https://github.com/slsa-framework/github-actions-buildtypes/tree/main/workflow/v1

```suggestion
Only the following [event types] are supported:

| Supported event type  | Event description                          |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| [`create`]            | Creation of a git tag or branch.           |
| [`release`]           | Creation or update of a GitHub release.    |
| [`push`]              | Creation or update of a git tag or branch. |
| [`workflow_dispatch`] | Manual trigger of a workflow.              |

`pull_request` events are currently not supported. If you would like support for
`pull_request`, please tell us about your use case on
[issue #358](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/issues/358). If
you have an issue in all other triggers please submit a
[new issue](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator/issues/new/choose).

[event types]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows
[`create`]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#create
[`release`]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#release
[`push`]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#push
[`workflow_dispatch`]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#workflow_dispatch
```
